# The object oriented interface
The interface for working with a library is usually called "API", but as it's better to call the Icinga2 API "API", the
interface from whatever python application / code to this library is called "interface" here (although the Icinga API
is of course an interface two...).

The object oriented interface of this library was introduced to have an easy way accessing Icinga2 data through python
objects. Therefore the following classes have been introduced:
* `Icinga2` is the "start" for all object oriented working. It's a client, inheriting from `API`.
* `Icinga2Objects` - Representation of one or more Icinga2 configuration object(s) in form of one python object
* `Icinga2Object` - Representation of *exactly one* Icinga2 configuration object as one python object
* Various specialized classes for a specific configuration object types

There is some inheritance:
* `Icinga2Objects` inherits from `CachedResultSet`
* `Icinga2Object` inherits from `Icinga2Objects` (!)
* Specialized classes for one object, for example `Host`, inherit at least from `Icinga2Object`
* Specialized classes for multiple objects, for example `Hosts` inherit at least from `Icinga2Objects`

## General
You propably want a Icinga2 object to work with. The constructor takes the same parameters as `Client` or `API`, with
the additional parameter cache_time, specifying how long attribute values should be cached (in seconds).

## Querying objects
Getting a bunch of Icinga2 configuration objects is really easy:
```
from icinga2api_py import Icinga2

# Get an Icinga2 object
icinga = Icinga2.from_pieces(host, auth=(username, password))

# Get a bundle of objects
services = icinga.objects.services.filter("service.state==1").get()

# Get one object
localhost = icinga.objects.hosts.localhost.get()
print(localhost["name"])  # "localhost"
```

The type of the queried objects and the name of one queried object are usually recognized.
Thanks to the specialized class `Host` we can develop our example to query all service states of localhost easily:
```
# Get services of localhost
localservices = localhost.services

localservices.values("attrs.state")  # Returns a list of all service states
if localservices:
    # Loading did not fail and minimum one service in localservices
    localservices[0]["name"]  # Name of one service

# TODO: maybe more examples...
```

As shown with the last lines, getting attribute values works the same as with `Client`, look at that part of the
documentation to read more about getting attribute values.

## Modifying and deleting objects // actions
Every `Icinga2Objects` object has a modify and a delete method. Both methods will call the objects `invalidate` method
to reset a possibly used cache (default); but they both have a no_invalidate parameter that will prevent resetting if
set to True. Both methods return a `ResultSet` object.
```
# Set the test123 custom var for some services
localservices.modify({"vars.test123": "TEST VALUE"})

# Delete localhost object cascading (!)
localhost.delete(cascade=True, no_invalidate=True)
# With no_invalidate set to True it's maybe possible (depending on cache expiry) to access localhost data further on
```

Also every `Icinga2Objects` object has an `action(<action>, **kwargs)` method to trigger actions like
acknowledge-problem. Pass parameters as kwargs to this method; see Icinga2 documentation for optional and required
parameters for wich possible actions. A `ResultSet` object is returned.

```
# Assuming continuation of previous example, without deletation of localhost

# Reschedule check, without forcing (what is default anyway...)
res = localhost.action("reschedule-check", force=False)

if res[0]["code"] >= 400:
    print("Failed to reschedule next check")
```


## Creating config objects
```
from icinga2api_py import Icinga2

icinga = Icinga2(url, auth=(username, password))

# icinga.create_object(<object type>, <object name>, <attrs dictionary>, [<templates>,] [ignore_on_error=False])
res = icinga.create_object("service", "localhost!load", {"check_command": "load"}, ["generic-service"])

if not res.ok:
    # res.status_code >= 400
    print("Failed to create service load on localhost")
```
The `Icinga2.create_object` method returns a `APIResponse` object.

## Querying templates, variables and more
For all "not special" cases, for example variables, this library will fall back to use `Icinga2Objects` and
`Icinga2Object` directly. Templates are special. They inherit from `Icinga2Objects`, but their modify and delete
methods are set to None, because modifying or deleting a template is not allowed at runtime (by Icinga).
For things (e.g. config packages), that can't be handled like configuration objects (Icinga2Objects), this library will
fall back to `ResultFromResponse`s.

Here just some random examples:
```
# Get host templates
icinga.templates.hosts.get()

# Get variables
vars = icinga.variables.get()
print("This Icinga instance has {} global variables!".format(len(vars)))

# Get Icinga app status - the IcingaApplication is handled as a configuration object (arguable)
app = icinga.status.IcingaApplication.get()["status"]["icingaapplication"]["app"]
dif = time.time() - app["program_start"]
print("Icinga runs for {} seconds now".format(dif))

# Get types - those are also Icinga2Objects (arguable)
icinga.types.get()

# Get config packages - these are NOT Icinga2Objects
packages = icinga.config.packages.get()
print("There are {} config packages right now".format(len(packages)))
```
